At a news conference following the hearing, the chief prosecutor in Charleston County Scarlett Wilson said she wants to speak with the families and review evidence before making any decision on whether to seek the death penalty against Roof. "Although my grandfather and the other victims died at the hands of hate ... hate won't win."

She says her office is working hand-in-hand with federal prosecutors, who are reviewing whether or not the shooting fits the federal definition of a hate crime.

The crime fits at least one of the reasons prosecutors can seek the death penalty in South Carolina ¡ª multiple people were killed in the same act. But Wilson says she always talks to families of victims before deciding whether to seek death.

Police documents released Friday say Roof stood over a witness and made a racially inflammatory remark and shot each victim multiple times. 

The documents also say that Roof's father and uncle called authorities after seeing surveillance photos of him publicized. Roof's father told investigators his son owned a .45-calibre handgun, the affidavits say.

Earlier reports said that Roof's father bought him the gun for his 21st birthday, though he denied that to media organizations on Friday, saying his son purchased the weapon with his own money. 

'An act of racial terrorism'

The comments in court seemed in keeping with a spirit evident on the streets of Charleston Friday, where people built a memorial and thousands attended a vigil to repudiate whatever a gunman would hope to accomplish by attacking one of the nation's most important African-American sanctuaries.

"A hateful person came to this community with some crazy idea he'd be able to divide, but all he did was unite us and make us love each other even more," Mayor Joseph P. Riley Jr. said as he described plans for a Friday night vigil at a sports arena near the church.

South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley said Friday that the state will "absolutely" want the death penalty for Roof, who opened fire after sitting through a Wednesday night Bible study session inside the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church.